12 April 1999
Ken Jackson

Bookweb is derived from the Dylan Programming sources for the book
published by Addison-Wesley in 1997 for HTML publication with Dylan
2.0 in April 1999. Work was started by Sonya Keene and completed by
Ken Jackson.

Source files have been modified for this conversion. This is a
separate set of sources since we do not expect to print a revised
edition of the book. Some is derived from the website created for
Harlequin and A-W at the time of publication of the book.

In the sources some small changes have been made to improve conversion
to HTML. The first page is not the title page of the book; it's from
the website. The TOC is generated. A section on Source Code before
Appendix A is derived from the website but made to refewrence the
website rather than directly link to sources. Appendix A is updated,
cutting most mention of Apple and Gwydion.

Sources are converted to MIF using ~doc/share/src/directory_to_mif
name-of-src-directory.

The WML used for this WebMaker conversion is db-new.wml. It generates
an error tha @hqn is an undefined variable. No bad effect. The
nodes.wml cuts the "Generated with Harlequin Webmaker" text from each
footer by undefining this variable but leaves some code in
place. Mapping for numbered lists to an autonumber rule generated two
lines for number and text so this db-new.wml uses a mapping for step-1
and step that we do not use in other Harlequin conversion.

The generated HTML is post-processed (to make background white and fix
a few character conversions) with ~doc/share/src/doc_html -verbose
-hyp -nbsp -bg *.HTM.

Finally, individual HTML files are edited to make the following changes:

1. _1.HTM trademark in title made smaller with addition of
<small><small><small>TM</small></small></small>.

2. The four "Part" pages have "Part 1" etc. added in front of part
name. This could easily be fixed in source if I were willing to
process one more time.

3. The index is cut and pasted to organize all the Symbols (heading
added) at the top of the index, as in the printed book.


The HTM and GIFs are tarred into one file for Hope: 
tar -cvf dyprog.tar -C /directory .
