Library: Library transcendental
==============================

The Transcendental library contains functions on numbers. It includes commonly
used numbers, such as π and ℯ, and the transcendental functions, including
sine, cosine, and tangent, and their inverse (arc) and hyperbolic
counterparts. Also included are the logarithmic family of functions (the
various log functions and exp), and the square-root and power (^) functions.


Sin, cosine, tangent, and their inverse (arc) functions:
--------------------------------------------------------
To understand the transcendental functions (particularly, sine, cosine, and
tangent, and their friends), one must know about the relationships for a right
triangle. The discussion will use the below reference figure:

: A
: |\
: | \
: |  \
: |__θ\
: B    C

Sine, cosine, and tangent are used when you know an angle and a length of one
of the sides of a right triangle, and you want to know the length of another
side. For these functions, the angle (θ) is in radians, not degrees. Using the
reference diagram above, for sine, you work with the hypotenuse (AC) and the
height (AB), for cosine, you work with the hypotenuse (AC) and the base length
(BC), and for tangent, you work with the base and the height.

The next question that comes up is if you have two sides of the right
triangle, and you need to know the angle. The arc functions of sine, cosine
and tangent resolve this issue. Let's use the same reference diagram for the
following discussion.

The arc-sine function (#asin#, also known as the inverse sine) gives θ (the
angle in radians) from the height (AB) over the hypotenuse (AC). The other arc
functions, #acos# and #atan#, behave as their more-familiar counterparts. So,
the arc-cosine gives θ from the base (BC) and the hypotenuse (AC); the
arc-tangent, from the height (AB) and the base (BC).


The π and ℯ constants:
----------------------
So, perhaps you are used to thinking in degrees, not radians. How do you
convert between the two when you use the above functions? That's as easy as
pi! If you have the angle in degrees and one of side lengths, first multiple
that angle by π / 180.0 (either #$double-pi# or #$single-pi#) to get radians,
and then use that resulting θ in the appropriate function.

There are several engrossing exercises for computing π, and several novel
approaches. The most widely-known approach is to compute the value of the
series 4 - 4/3 + 4/5 - 4/7 ... (which takes a very large number of terms to
get close to Chuck Moore's find; see #$double-pi#). Another is to use the
Fibonacci numbers (see the article on computing π using arc-tangents at
http://www.mcs.surrey.ac.uk/Personal/R.Knott/Fibonacci/fibpi.html) which
become usable in about ten terms.

I will leave aside the temptation to find mathematical similarities between π
and ℯ, with the exception of stating that both can use the Fibonacci numbers
to find close approximations of their values. ℯ finds use in logarithmic and
exponential calculations.


Topic: threads modules
------------------------------
- #Module transcendental#

